Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
It's hard to imagine that anyone has packed more living into 80 years than Don Nicholas O'Brien.
A&M class of 1948, A&M quarterback in 1947, 48 and 49, played football and baseball in the service before the Korean War heated up.
Once it did, he flew 20 B-29 missions from his base in Okinawa.
What was going to be a single hitch in the Air Force, followed by a coaching career, turned out instead to be a 31-year career as a flyer.
That included three tours of Vietnam, flying 69 B-52 missions.
And then after he retired in 1976, Don Nicholas and his Air Force buddy, Ken Lighty, spent 15 years as one of the top senior tennis doubles teams in the country.
It has been quite a life, and we are proud to welcome Colonel Don Nicholas to Veterans of the Valley.
What a life it's been.
I want to talk about the football.
I want to talk about Texas A&M before you went off to Korea, but I want to get into that right now.
After college, you finished at A&M in 1950, and after college, you thought about being a coach, but in the meantime, you were going to do a 90-day hitch, but that turned into a 31-year career.
Sort of talk about after college and getting into the service.
Of course, I graduated at mid-year in 1950 and was ready to pursue a coaching career.
I had a little block of time before the football started the following year, and so I decided to accept a 90-day tour of active duty and kind of try my commission out up at Hensley Field in Dallas.
And so it was up there that I took the examinations over at the Naval.
air facility there and passed them and was notified later on that I had passed and that I would be called up to active duty or given the chance to be called up to active duty for the flying program in probably six months or so.
So that sounded good to me and I'd always wanted to fly so I jumped at it and here I am.
And you ended up, you were flying in Korea, you flew B-29s in Korea.
B-29, yes.
That's quite an airplane.
What was it like to fly that much metal?
Well, one of the things about it, it's an 11-man crew to begin with, and all of the positions inside that airplane.
Kind of a small airplane for 11 people to get into and work.
Right.
But we had a great crew.
Finished flying school at Lubbock in 1951.
I was sent to San Antonio Randolph Field for transition training into B-29s.
And it was there that I was crewed up with people who were fed into the system by the personnel folks.
And we had a lot of retreads down there, old World War II types that had been recalled to active duty.
And I was lucky to get on with Lou Andrews, an old, experienced B-17 pilot, along with a navigator and a bombardier.
I believe it was a radar operator.
We all crewed up and then we had some young'uns manning the gunning positions.
So we went through training together.
Finishing school for us out after Randolph was Lake Charles.
Went out there and all went to survival school and finished up our work and were immediately reassigned to the 19th Bomb Group.
out at Okinawa.
And so that's the way it all got started.
Don, the Korean War sometimes is called the Forgotten War by a lot of people, a lot of historians.
Obviously not forgotten by you or a lot of historians.
Talk about your experience in the Korean War, 20 bombing missions, 20 missions into North Korea or into Korea.
Sort of talk about your experience there.
Well, the tours out there were generally six months long, and they were rotating crews in there pretty regularly.
So I think my crew flew about 25 missions.
I flew 20 because generally when the new crews came in, they bumped the co-pilot and took the new pilot along with the old head and gave him a couple of rides along with the navigator.
the two key guys on the crew and so I got bumped a couple of times and so I didn't quite catch up with my crew but nevertheless the flying was generally interdictory type in other words we were up after troop concentrations
marshaling yards.
Whenever some kind of a skirmish broke out and they needed some air support, we were called in up there to help out with that.
But we were in good shape all along.
Our fighter guys kept the
The MiGs off of us, for the most part.
There were times when they did get through.
And we lost a couple of airplanes out of my outfit early on, and I remember it very well.
It was on June the 10th.
I was not flying that night, but one of our crews was flying, and they were shot down.
coming off a target, I believe, by MiGs who were up in the area.
Now, they had sanctuary over in Manchuria, over in a place called Antongue, and they came out pretty often.
But our fighter guys, again, kept them pretty well suppressed, but every once in a while, you know, they'd get loose.
You did get shot at at one point, though, and lost an engine, right?
That was kind of a dicey deal, I guess.
Yes, it was, and I remember that was my first experience having something like that happen, and it happened at night.
Now, most of our missions were at night because of the
A daytime problem with the MiGs.
They were beginning to get pretty close to our airplanes up there, so they finally changed us to night missions pretty much exclusively.
And so we would be up there and listen to all the calls coming from the radar sites and others who track the fighters.
And this particular night we were up doing some work around the hydroelectric plants on the Yalu River.
And the flak going in was pretty heavy because the way that we were bombing, we were bombing single ship.
would be stacked up mile separation and 500 feet back for the cell and proceed that way.
But all the radar searchlights would pick up the lead airplane coming through because they knew where he was headed.
He was headed for the dam.
And they'd start all of their shooting up there.
And I heard something that sounded like just a handful of rocks thrown against the fuselage.
And we began to lose oil pressure on one of the engines and the engineer who was monitoring that said we better shut this down.
I think we're going to maybe have a fire or something.
Before he could get it shut down, it caught fire.
And it makes a pretty big light at night when you have an engine fire.
And so we finally nosed it over and picked up a little speed and just kind of helped it go out.
We actually blew it out.
And it stopped.
And after that particular mission, we had to go down to southern Japan in Itazuki and land and get the airplane fixed.
And when I got outside and looked at the condition of the fuselage and the engine, it looked like a big can opener had gone through and made little holes in an airplane.
But fortunately it didn't hit any important hydraulic system, electrics or anything like that.
So we were able to get it fixed and get on back.
I know you count yourself as very fortunate.
Between Korea and Vietnam, you described your duties in the Air Force as being in a constant state of readiness.
We're talking about the Cold War, always being ready.
And you talked about your B-52 missions from Bergstrom to the East Coast to Alaska.
This was just to always keep a check on the Russians, essentially.
That's pretty much...
how you spent your time between Korea and Vietnam, is that right?
Yes.
I was in the Strategic Air Command, and of course they were kind of carrying the ball for our face-off with the Soviets with regard to the nuclear war.
And part of that scheme was a constant alert that went on for years, and that duty was given to various units from time to time on a regular basis.
And we would, like you say, take off from Bergstrom out to the East Coast, refuel, and take on a big load of gas and get on over toward Alaska.
And we had a place over there where we orbited to make sure that the Soviets, and they could see us on their radars.
And they knew when I left that a guy was going to be in behind me and he'll come up there.
And so that position was manned for 24 hours a day and for years.
Right.
But that mission would last anywhere from 22 to 24 hours.
And we would, when we'd leave our position there around Alaska, come on down to Seattle and then kind of angle back over toward Bergstrom.
And that would kind of wear you out after a while.
But we were able to spread it out amongst the squadron people, and so it was bearable.
It's tough to move through 31 years in the limited time that we have, but I want to move on to Vietnam.
You did do three tours of Vietnam, flying V-52s, missions of, I think you said 69 missions in your service in Vietnam, missions that would go from 8 to 10 hours each.
sort of wrap up your service in Vietnam and what your job was?
Well, I went out there first.
In 1966, I went out as just a line pilot, and so I was flying a crew, and we were flying every third day, eight to 10 hours, like you say.
And then my second tour out there, I got a squadron, and so I did a fair amount of flying with my people.
I had about 15 crews out there in that squadron, so I would fly with them on a regular basis.
And then the third tour out there in 1972, there was a pretty good break between 67 and 72.
I was the vice-wing commander of a unit in Plattsburgh, New York, and we were flying FB-111s up there.
But I guess the people who were manning the jobs out there saw my B-52 experience and decided that I would be somebody they could use out there.
And at that time, they were building up the force for eventually going north.
And so I was the director of operations for the Air Division, and we had about two tactical wings out there about that time.
And then the incumbent of the vice commander job was moved into another job, and so I got the vice commander job.
But we were flying from that particular job.
We were doing airborne commander work, more supervisory stuff.
If we had maybe six airplanes going out or three airplanes going out, they needed an airborne commander for the flight.
And so we were flying in that capacity for the most part.
Right.
And you did encounter, there was ground-to-air missiles aiming to get at you, but you were pretty well protected on that, and you could pretty much see them coming, right?
We could see ground flash at night.
Normally we would pick up, our equipment was...
such that we could hear a radar sweep on our airplane if somebody had interest in us.
You could hear this sweep coming by.
And when that sound became a little more rapid, you knew they were trying to lock onto you.
And once they got a, you heard a little something like a bee buzzing in there, that meant a missile was imminent.
I mean, probably going to be launched.
Now, we'll say this about our wild weasel guys.
If those guys came up on the air and stayed on, stayed locked on more than about five seconds, the wild weasels were down there and they were looking for them.
And they had some missiles they could launch and put right in the middle of that
They threw like a treetop level, right?
Yeah, yeah.
They would just lob those Shrike missiles over into that battery.
So we just called it Kentucky windage.
They would come up just long enough to get a little bit of a track on you and a lock, and they would fire stuff.
But it was not very precise, and so they didn't get many of us that way.
Don, you had a wonderful military career, and I wish we could do a whole show just on your military career, but there's a whole different aspect of your career, and that's Don Nicholas, the athlete.
And we referred to it a little bit in the opening.
Don, you were a football player, you were a baseball player.
In your retirement years, you were a tennis player on the tennis circuit.
We're gonna go to some photographs in a minute.
We're gonna see a lot of pictures of Don Nicholas, the A&M quarterback in the late 40s, as a matter of fact.
As a matter of fact, let's go to those pictures now, and we can look at it.
We can talk a little bit about it right now, the photographs of you, and here we are.
First off, this is your senior photo at Texas A&M.
That is one fine-looking senior right there.
So that was taken, I guess, what, in 1949 or so?
1948, really.
1948, yeah.
And that was taken up at the North Gate, and we had a guy up there that...
I think he took all the senior pictures.
Yeah, yeah.
That's a great picture.
Great picture.
Okay, this is the, if I'm getting this right, I think the viewers can see it up at the top.
This is the team with Homer Norton was the head coach, and the coaches are in the top row, and their heads may be a little cut off, but...
As a matter of fact, if we want the viewers to see you the way I've identified it, if you look in the third row towards the left side, see number 37 right there.
You're the guy right behind number 37.
I think that's what we discovered.
Is that you?
So that would be the team of what, 1947, I believe?
That's 40, let's see.
If Homer Norton was there, I believe he was there one year, your first year back in 1947.
And that was Homer Norton's team.
So that would be the 47 team.
Barney Welch down there on the front, second from the, to the left, old 79 there.
Okay.
Yeah, there's Barney.
Barney hasn't changed much.
And, gosh, yeah, that was a great bunch of guys.
Right.
Now we're going to move to the 1949 team.
Harry Steitler was the head coach, and I believe Coach Steitler is there on the second row, the white-haired gentleman, sort of second from the right.
I believe that's Coach Steitler, if I'm right.
You're in the very front, number 16, and talk about this picture, because even though you're in the picture, you weren't really a member of the team.
Talk about how that picture came about.
Well, I had good friends who played on this team and were holdovers from last year.
And I was at Hensley doing my 90-day tour of active duty.
And so we got together, and they said, come on down here, and we'll have some fun.
You watch the spring game.
we'll be able to commiserate a little bit.
So I came down and went in to see Mr. Steitler and had my uniform on.
And he says, hi, Nick, how you doing?
Good to see you.
And he said, are you going to be down here a little while?
And I said, yeah.
I came down to watch the spring game.
He said, you know, we didn't take a
picture of the squad last year, and so I'd like to have you in this picture.
He said, go in and have Sarge fit you up with the uniform and come join us.
I need to correct myself.
This is the 1950 team.
You finished in 1949.
This was the 1950 team, and he invited you to come and sit in the front row with the picture even though you'd already finished.
Well, that's great.
So you've got your team picture.
That's great.
Let's move on.
I think we've got it.
There's an action picture of
The split tee quarterback, Don Nicholas, right there.
You're carrying the football.
See old Kyle Field in the background.
That's what it used to look like.
There you go.
Talk about you're on the left, and a good member of the Brazos Valley there is in the middle and right.
Talk about who those people are.
Well, that's Jimmy Cashin in the middle there, and Burl Beatty on the right.
Right, you're on the left, yeah.
Burrell was an all-stater from Paris, Texas.
Jimmy, of course, played his football locally here at Consolidated.
His brother is Red Cashin, who everybody knows, the football official, and lived here for a long time.
Burrell became a coach.
Right?
There's that good old action shot that you see a lot of, I guess I've got to say, maybe they still take those pictures of the football players, the action shot, so that they'll all have one.
But you see a lot of guys have their own ideas about, you know, those shots.
But the guy just kind of lines you up and says, come by and just make a turn and, you know, look kind of determined when you do that.
Look mean.
Look like you really do play without a helmet.
Yeah.
Okay.
Let's move on.
There's a shot of you.
This is after you'd finished at Texas A&M.
This was actually when you, I guess, early in your military career, right?
It was.
I had just graduated from flying school and was on my way, I thought, to the top rung.
And my mother said, now, go have your picture taken.
And so I got all my stuff together and went down and had a picture taken.
I bet Mom loved that picture.
Yes, she really did.
That's a great picture.
Nice teeth.
Yeah, okay.
Now, talk about this picture.
This is our flight crew.
That's Lou Andrews on the left there.
He was an old automobile dealer in Lansing, Michigan, when he was recalled to active duty.
The guy down there on my left is a recallee, and the guy on the right is a recallee.
You're bottom row second from the left, by the way.
Bottom row second from the left.
Right.
And the rest of those kids are just youngsters, except for that engineer.
He's kind of up in the middle.
Right.
But I see there's still five of us that get together every year.
We still see one another and have a big time talking about all that.
That was our airplane.
Yeah.
Now this is, we're going to fast forward a few years, as a matter of fact, as you can see written on this picture, the National Senior Indoor Finals, taken in 1986 in Seattle, Washington.
This is a, you're the second from the left, I guess on the left, is that your partner?
Yes, that's Ken Lighty on the left.
An old Air Force buddy.
And of the other two, is that the other two that you played?
And they were real tennis players.
Now, Ken and I just took it up.
He was a good tennis player, but I had played tennis before, and we just kept playing until we got better and finally ended up in the finals of this tennis tournament up in Seattle.
And the two fellows on the right, I guess those were the ones that eeked a victory.
Yeah, that's an Australian there on the right, and he's a heck of a tennis player.
And the other guy is a surgeon and also a very fine amateur tennis player.
Right.
But we had a great time up there and just enjoyed it.
I want to talk more about your athletic career.
Let's go back now, as a matter of fact, because you played actually, you started at A&M in 1944.
You played in 1944, but then you went off to the service.
And when you went off to the service, sort of a downtime, little mop up from World War II,
but you played football and baseball in the service for service teams in Honda.
Talk about that.
I don't think a lot of people are aware about athletics in service.
It came about when the war ended.
I was a young enlisted guy, and after basic training at Amarillo, their tech training school was there, the airplane and engines course, and so I was assigned to school.
and I was well on my way to going to the Pacific as a B-29 crew chief whenever the war was over.
And I remember it exactly.
Somebody ran in and said the war was over about August the 15th, I believe, in 1950, 1945.
1945, I'm getting my years mixed up.
And so from that time on,
The guys who had accumulated enough points and they adjusted those for this sudden happening so that people were beginning to get out and go home.
I was a new fellow on the block, so to speak, because I had just finished up my basic training, and so I still had some time to do before I could go home.
The physical training officer on the base there put out a call for a football team, and I had played some, so I went up there and applied, and he said, glad to have you.
And we'll make you one of our physical training instructors, and then you can play football here and instruct in the physical training program, which suited me fine.
I mean, that was right down my alley.
So we played.
We were the Amarillo Sky Giants, and we had a great football team.
A lot of folks turned out to play.
And we played people like the Hereford Prison Guards and we played the Dalhart Dominators.
We played the Houston, it was Ellington Field, the old Ellington Field, Houston, I forget what their name was.
And after about halfway through the season, we were beginning to run out of football players because everybody was getting out and leaving.
So, the commander at Hondo Army Air Field had a team down there and he thought maybe some of us would like to come down and play.
So he came up and bargained with our guy and he said, yeah, take them on down there and let them play.
So we went to Hondo and played down there.
And you played there.
Don, we just got a couple of minutes left, but I want to move on.
You eventually played baseball in the service also.
And you played in Enid.
You played in Oklahoma.
You played against a lot of folks.
When you came back and played football at Texas A&M, wins were a little bit scarce for Texas A&M in those three years of 47 through 49.
But you played with people like Marion Pugh and Bob Smith.
And we saw Barney Welch.
You played against people like Doak Walker and Bobby Lane and...
Tom Landry, I believe that you said, who played for the University of Texas, Daryl Royal.
So there were a lot of famous people that played around that time that you were quarterback in A&M.
Well, as you look back on it, it seems to...
take on a little more significance because at that time they were just football players like everybody else.
We were talking the other day about our friend Charlie Wright that caught the pass that was tipped by Bubba Shands and he happened to be running behind Bubba and was one of the few moral victories that we had.
I think we tied Texas 14 all that day.
It was a great career, and I don't want to leave without mentioning your wife, Mary, that you've been married nearly 55 years now.
You have four children, three sons that all graduated from A&M and were Marines, and a daughter, Jackie, and I believe seven grandkids and a great-grandchild, right?
Right.
Right, and you're very, very proud of all of those.
Absolutely.
And we're very proud of you, and thank you for your service, and what a great life.
Thank you.
It's still going strong with great health.
It's been a pleasure.
Don Nicholas continues what has certainly been a life well spent, wherever he did, whatever he did, whether on the football field, the baseball diamond, the tennis court, or in the cockpit.
He did it with passion, and we thank him for his service.
We thank all veterans, and we invite you to join us again next time on Veterans of the Valley.